feat(ts): add unnecessaryComparisons rule (#2169)
flint-fyi/flint: packages/site/src/content/docs/rules/ts/unnecessaryComparisons.mdx

---
description: "Reports comparisons that are always true, always false, or can be simplified."
title: "unnecessaryComparisons"
topic: "rules"
---

import { Tabs, TabItem } from "@astrojs/starlight/components";
import { RuleEquivalents } from "~/components/RuleEquivalents";
import RuleSummary from "~/components/RuleSummary.astro";

<RuleSummary plugin="ts" rule="unnecessaryComparisons" />

This rule detects comparison patterns that are logically unnecessary, impossible, or can be simplified.
Such patterns often indicate logic errors, copy-paste mistakes, or overly complex code that should be refactored.

The rule covers several categories of problematic comparisons:

1. **Self-comparisons**: Comparing a value to itself (e.g., `x === x`)
2. **Impossible ranges**: Range checks that can never be satisfied (e.g., `x <= 400 && x > 500`)
3. **Redundant double comparisons**: OR patterns that can be simplified (e.g., `x === y || x < y` can become `x <= y`)

> 4. **Ineffective checks**: Redundant bounds in AND chains (e.g., `x < 200 && x <= 299` where the second check is always true when the first is)

Author: Makes sense - removed the bold formatting!

```ts
// Valid range: x is between 400 and 500
if (x >= 400 && x <= 500) {
	// ...
}
```

```ts
// Valid narrow range
if (x > 5 && x < 10) {
	// ...
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Redundant Double Comparisons

<Tabs>
<TabItem label="❌ Incorrect">

```ts
// Can be simplified to: x <= y
if (x === y || x < y) {
	// ...
}
```

```ts
// Can be simplified to: x >= y
if (x === y || x > y) {
	// ...
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem label="✅ Correct">

```ts
// Use the simpler combined operator
if (x <= y) {
	// ...
}
```

```ts
if (x >= y) {
	// ...
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Ineffective Checks

<Tabs>
<TabItem label="❌ Incorrect">

```ts
// x <= 299 is redundant when x < 200 is already checked
if (x < 200 && x <= 299) {
	// The second check adds nothing
}
```

```ts
// x >= 50 is redundant when x > 100 is already checked
if (x > 100 && x >= 50) {
	// ...
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem label="✅ Correct">

```ts
// Just use the stronger constraint
if (x < 200) {
	// ...
}
```

```ts
// Or use both bounds when they're actually needed
if (x > 100 && x < 200) {
	// Valid range check
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Options

This rule is not configurable.

## When Not To Use It

> If your project relies on dynamic getters or other side effects that could make seemingly-identical expressions return different values, you might need to disable this rule for those specific cases.

Reviewer: [Docs] Aligning with the suggestions other rules have been going with:

```suggestion
If your project relies on dynamic getters or other side effects that could make seemingly-identical expressions return different values, this rule might report false positives.
You might consider using [Flint disable comments](/directives) and/or [configuration file disables](/configuration#files) for those specific situations instead of completely disabling this rule.
```

Author: Updated!
